---
title: C Part3
layout: post
---

## 调试C程序

> 现代可视化的编辑器如Visual Studio, XCode集成了很方便好用的调试工具，使用这些工具可以极大的提升效率，不必纠结于命令行+GDB/LLDB的方式，当然

### GDB & LLDB

> 使用GDB调试需要有debug symbol，GCC编译时加入`-g`生成符号文件（例如XCode会生成 .dSYM文件）

- GDB tricks
	- `gdb --args [PROGRAM]` Normally, gdb takes arguments you give it and assumes they are for itself. Using --args passes them to the program.
	- `thread apply all bt` .Dump a backtrace for all threads. It’s very useful.
	- `gdb --batch --ex run --ex bt --ex q --args [PROGRAM] [ARGS]`Run the program so that if it bombs, you get a backtrace.


- GDB参考
	- `run [args]` Start your program with `[args]`.
	- `break [file:]` function Set a break point at [file:]function. You can also use b.
	- `backtrace` Dump a backtrace of the current calling stack. Shorthand is `bt`.
	- `print expr` Print the value of expr. Shorthand is `p`.
	- `continue` Continue running the program. Shorthand is `c`.
	- `next` Next line, but step over function calls. Shorthand is `n`.
	- `step` Next line, but step into function calls. Shorthand is `s`.
	- `quit` Exit GDB.
	- `help` List the types of commands. You can then get help on the class of command as well as
	the command.
	- `cd`, `pwd`, `make` just like running these commands in your shell.
	- `shell` Quickly start a shell so you can do other things.
	- `clear` Clear a breakpoint.
	- `info break`, `info watch` Show information about breakpoints and watchpoints.
	- `attach pid` Attach to a running process so you can debug it.
	- `detach` Detach from the process.
	- `list` List out the next ten source lines. Add a  to list the previous ten lines.

- LLDB参考
	- `run [args]` Start your program with [args].
	- `breakpoint set --name [file:]function` Set a break point at [file:]function. You can also
	use `b`, which is way easier.
	- `thread backtrace` Dump a backtrace of the current calling stack. Shorthand is `bt`.
	- `print expr` Print the value of expr. Shorthand is `p`.
	- `continue` Continue running the program. Shorthand is `c`.
	- `next` Next line, but step over function calls. Shorthand is `n`.
	- `step` Next line, but step into function calls. Shorthand is `s`.
	- `quit` Exit LLDB.
	- `help` List the types of commands. You can then get help on the class of command as well as
	the command itself.
	- `cd`, `pwd`, `make` just like running these commands in your shell.
	- `shell` Quickly start a shell so you can do other things.

### 动态库


## 资料

